.. _Association Rules Filter:

Association Rules Filter
========================

.. image:: ../icons/AssociationRulesFilter.png

A widget for printing out the rules and for their manual exploration and
selection.

Signals
-------

Inputs:
   - Association Rules
      A list of rules


Outputs:
   - Association Rules
      Selected rules



Description
-----------

This widget can be used for three purposes:
   - graphically showing the confidence and support of the induced rules
   - selecting a subset of rules based on their confidence and support
   - listing the induced rules and the corresponding measures of quality

The columns of the grid on the left hand side of the widget represent
different supports and the rows represents confidences. The scale is given
above the grid: for the case in this snapshot, support goes from 28% to 75%
and the confidence ranges from 29% to 100%. Each cell is colored according
to the number of rules with that particular support and confidence - the
darker the cell, the more rules are inside it.

You can select a part of the grid. In the snapshot we selected the rules
with supports between 36% and 66% and confidences from 33% to 82%.

When the widget receives certain data, it shows the area containing all
the rules. You can :obj:`Zoom` in to enlarge the selected part, push
:obj:`Show All` to see the region with the rules again, or :obj:`No Zoom`
to see the region with support and confidence from 0 to 1. :obj:`Unselect`
removes the selection.

If nothing is selected, the widget outputs all rules.

On the right hand side of the widget there is a list of the selected rules.
The checkboxes above can be used to select the measures of rule quality that
we are interested in. Let L, R and B be the number of examples that fit the
left, the right and both sides of the rule, respectively, and N the total
number of examples in the data set. The measures are then defined as follows

   - support = B / N
   - confidence = B / L
   - coverage = L / N
   - strength = R / L
   - lift = N * B / (L * R)
   - leverage = N * B - L * R



With the buttons below you can :obj:`Save Rules` into a tab-delimited file
or :obj:`Send Rules` to the widget connected to the output. The latter is
only enabled if :obj:`Send rules automatically` is unchecked. When it is
checked, the rules are put on the widget's output automatically at every
selection change.

Examples
--------

This widget is used with the :ref:`Association Rules` and maybe with a
tree-like :ref:`Association Rules Explorer` The typical schema is shown below.

.. image:: images/AssociationRules-Schema.png
   :alt: Association Rules
