.. _Mosaic Display:

Mosaic Display
==============

.. image:: ../icons/MosaicDisplay.png

Shows a mosaic display of n-way tables.

Signals
-------

Inputs:
   - Examples (ExampleTable)
      Input data set.
   - Example Subset (ExampleTable)
      A subset of data instances from Examples.
   - Selected Examples (ExampleTable)
      A subset of examples belonging to manually selected cells in mosaic
      display.

Outputs:
   - None


Description
-----------

The mosaic display is a graphical method to visualize the counts in n-way
`contingency tables <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Contingency_table>`_, that
is, tables where each cell corresponds to a distinct value-combination of n
attributes. The method was proposed by Hartigan & Kleiner
([HartiganKleiner81]_) and extended by Friendly ([Friendly94]_). Each cell in
mosaic display corresponds to a single cell in contingency table. If the data
contains a class attribute, the mosaic display will show the class
distribution.

Orange's implementation of mosaic display allows to observe the interactions
of up to four variables in a single visualization. The snapshot below shows a
mosaic display for the Titanic data set, observing three variables (sex,
status, and age) and their association with a class (survived). The diagram
shows that the survival (red color) was highest for women traveling in the
first class, and lowest for men traveling in the second and third class.

.. image:: images/MosaicDisplay-Titanic.png
   :alt: Mosiac Display on titanic dataset

This visualization gets slightly more complex - but once getting used to, more
informative - if the expected class distribution is shown on the same
visualization. For this purpose, a sub-box
(:obj:`Use sub-boxes on the left to show...` and below it choose
:obj:`Apriori class distribution`. This would plot a bar on the top of every
cell displayed, being able to observe the difference between the actual and
expected distribution for each cell. Change :obj:`Apriori class distribution`
to :obj:`Expected class distribution` to compare the actual distributions to
those computed by assuming the independence of attributes.

.. image:: images/MosaicDisplay-Titanic-Apriori.png

The degree of deviation from aprori class distribution for each cell can be
directly visualized using :obj:`Standard Pearson residuals` option (from
:obj:`Colors in cells represent ...` box, see snapshot below). On Titanic data
set, this visualization clearly shows for which combinations of attributes the
changes of survival were highest or lowest.

.. image:: images/MosaicDisplay-Titanic-Residuals.png
   :alt: Mosiac Display - Pearson residual

If there are many attributes, finding subsets which would yield interesting
mosaic displays is at least cumbersome. Orange implementation includes
:obj:`VizRank` (:obj:`Main` tab), which can list provide a list of most
interesting subsets with chosen cardinality. Various measures of
interestingness are implemented, but in principle all favor displays where at
least some cells would exhibit high deviation from the apriori class
distributions.

.. image:: images/MosaicDisplay-Titanic-VizRank.png
   :alt: Mosiac Display with Viz Rank

Instead of comparing cell's class distribution to apriori ones, these can be
compared to distribution from a subset of instances from the same data domain.
The widget uses a separate input channel for this purpose. Notice also that
individual cells can be selected/de-selected (clicking with left or right mouse
button on the cell), sending out the instances from the selected cells using
the :obj:`Selected Examples` channel.

References
----------

.. [HartiganKleiner81] Hartigan, J. A., and Kleiner, B. (1981).  Mosaics for
   contingency tables. In W. F. Eddy (Ed.),  Computer Science and Statistics:
   Proceedings of the 13th Symposium on the Interface. New York:
   Springer-Verlag.

.. [Friendly94] Friendly, M. (1994). Mosaic displays for multi-way contingency
   tables.  Journal of the American Statistical Association,  89, 190-200.
