.. _Example Distance:

Example Distance
================

.. image:: ../icons/ExampleDistance.png

Computes distances between examples in the data set

Signals
-------

Inputs:
   - Examples
      A list of examples


Outputs:
   - Distance Matrix
      A matrix of example distances


Description
-----------

Widget Example Distances computes the distances between the examples in the
data sets. Don't confuse it with a similar widget for computing the distances
between attributes.

.. image:: images/ExampleDistance.png
   :alt: Example Distance Widget

The available :obj:`Distance Metrics` definitions are :obj:`Euclidean`,
:obj:`Manhattan`, :obj:`Hammming` and :obj:`Relief`. Besides, of course,
different formal definitions, the measures also differ in how correctly
they treat unknown values. Manhattan and Hamming distance do not excel in
this respect: when computing by-attribute distances, if any of the two values
are missing, the corresponding distance is set to 0.5 (on a normalized scale
where the largest difference in attribute values is 1.0). Relief distance is
similar to Manhattan, but with a more correct treatment for discrete
attributes: it computes the expected distances by the probability distribution
computed from the data (see any Kononenko's papers on ReliefF for the
definition).

The most correct treatment of unknown values is done by the Euclidean metrics
which computes and uses the probability distributions of discrete attributes,
while for continuous distributions it computes the expected distance assuming
the Gaussian distribution of attribute values, where the distribution's
parameters are again assessed from the data.

The rows/columns of the resulting distance matrix can be labeled by the
values of a certain attribute which can be chosen in the bottom box,
:obj:`Example label`.


Examples
--------

This widget is a typical intermediate widget: it gives shows no user readable
results and its output needs to be fed to a widget that can do something
useful with the computed distances, for instance the :ref:`Distance Map`,
:ref:`Hierarchical Clustering` or :ref:`MDS`.

.. image:: images/ExampleDistance-Schema.png
   :alt: Association Rules
