.. _Hierarchical Clustering:

Hierarchical Clustering
=======================

.. image:: ../icons/HierarchicalClustering.png

Groups items using a hierarchical clustering algorithm.

Signals
-------

Inputs:
   - Distance Matrix
      A matrix of distances between items being clustered


Outputs:
   - Selected Examples
      A list of selected examples; applicable only when the input matrix
      refers to distances between examples
   - Remaining Examples
      A list of unselected examples
   - Centroids
      A list of cluster centroids

Description
-----------

The widget computes hierarchical clustering of arbitrary types of objects from
the matrix of distances between them and shows the corresponding dendrogram. If
the distances apply to examples, the widget offers some special functionality
(adding cluster indices, outputting examples...).

.. image:: images/HierarchicalClustering.png

The widget supports three kinds of linkages. In :obj:`Single linkage`
clustering, the distance between two clusters is defined as the distance
between the closest elements of the two clusters. :obj:`Average linkage`
clustering computes the average distance between elements of the two clusters,
and :obj:`Complete linkage` defines the distance between two clusters as the
distance between their most distant elements.

Nodes of the dendrogram can be labeled. What the labels are depends upon the
items being clustered. For instance, when clustering attributes, the labels
are obviously the attribute names. When clustering examples, we can use the
values of one of the attributes, typically one that give the name or id of an
instance, as labels. The label can be chosen in the box :obj:`Annotate`, which
also allows setting the font size and line spacing.

Huge dendrograms can be pruned by checking :obj:`Limit pring depth` and
selecting the appropriate depth. This only affects the displayed dendrogram
and not the actual clustering.

Clicking inside the dendrogram can have two effects. If the cut off line is
not shown (:obj:`Show cutoff line` is unchecked), clicking inside the
dendrogram will select a cluster. Multiple clusters can be selected by holding
Ctrl. Each selected cluster is shown in different color and is treated as a
separate cluster on the output.

If :obj:`Show cutoff line` is checked, clicking in the dendrogram places a
cutoff line. All items in the clustering are selected and the are divided
into groups according to the position of the line.

If the items being clustered are examples, they can be added a cluster index
(:obj:`Append cluster indices`). The index can appear as a
:obj:`Class attribute`, ordinary :obj:`Attribute` or a :obj:`Meta attribute`.
In the former case, if the data already has a class attribute, the original
class is placed among meta attributes.

The data can be output on any change (:obj:`Commit on change`) or, if this
is disabled, by pushing :obj:`Commit`.


.. This is from the old Alex Jakulin's widget doc. Left in case BIC is
   reimplemented

   Clustering has two parameters that can be set by the user, the number of
   clusters and the type of distance metrics, :obj:`Euclidean distance` or
   :obj:`Manhattan`. Any changes must be confirmed by pushing :obj:`Apply`.

   The table on the right hand side shows the results of clustering. For each
   cluster it gives the number of examples, its fitness and BIC.

   Fitness measures how well the cluster is defined. Let d<sub>i,C</sub> be the
   average distance between point i and the points in cluster C. Now, let
   a<sub>i</sub> equal d<sub>i,C'</sub>, where C' is the cluster i belongs to,
   and let b<sub>i</sub>=min d<sub>i,C</sub> over all other clusters C. Fitness
   is then defined as the average silhouette of the cluster C, that is
   avg( (b<sub>i</sub>-a<sub>i</sub>)/max(b<sub>i</sub>, a<sub>i</sub>) ).

   To make it simple, fitness close to 1 signifies a well-defined cluster.

   BIC is short for Bayesian Information Criteria and is computed as
   ln L-k(d+1)/2 ln n, where k is the number of clusters, d is dimension of
   data (the number of attributes) and n is the number of examples
   (data instances). L is the likelihood of the model, assuming the
   spherical Gaussian distributions around the centroid(s) of the cluster(s).


Examples
--------

The schema below computes clustering of attributes and of examples.

.. image:: images/HierarchicalClustering-Schema.png

We loaded the Zoo data set. The clustering of attributes is already shown
above. Below is the clustering of examples, that is, of animals, and the nodes
are annotated by the animals' names. We connected the :ref:`Linear projection`
showing the freeviz-optimized projection of the data so that it shows all
examples read from the file, while the signal from Hierarchical clustering is
used as a subset. Linear projection thus marks the examples selected in
Hierarchical clustering. This way, we can observe the position of the selected
cluster(s) in the projection.

.. image:: images/HierarchicalClustering-Example.png

To (visually) test how well the clustering corresponds to the actual classes
in the data, we can tell the widget to show the class ("type") of the animal
instead of its name (:obj:`Annotate`). Correspondence looks good.

.. image:: images/HierarchicalClustering-Example2.png

A fancy way to verify the correspondence between the clustering and the actual
classes would be to compute the chi-square test between them. As Orange does
not have a dedicated widget for that, we can compute the chi-square in
:ref:`Attribute Distance` and observe it in :ref:`Distance Map`. The only
caveat is that Attribute Distance computes distances between attributes and
not the class and the attribute, so we have to use :ref:`Select attributes` to
put the class among the ordinary attributes and replace it with another
attribute, say "tail" (this is needed since Attribute Distance requires data
with a class attribute, for technical reasons; the class attribute itself does
not affect the computed chi-square).

A more direct approach is to leave the class attribute (the animal type) as it
is, simply add the cluster index and observe its information gain in the
:ref:`Rank`.

More tricks with a similar purpose are described in the documentation for
:ref:`K-Means Clustering`.

The schema that does both and the corresponding settings of the hiearchical
clustering widget are shown below.

.. image:: images/HierarchicalClustering-Schema2.png

.. image:: images/HierarchicalClustering-Example3.png
