.. _Continuize:

Continuize
==========

.. image:: ../icons/Continuize.png

Turns discrete attributes into continuous dummy variables.

Signals
-------

Inputs:
   - Examples (ExampleTable)
      Input data set.

Outputs:
   - Examples (ExampleTable)
      Output data set.


Description
-----------

Continuize widget receives a data set on the input and outputs the same data in
which the discrete attributes (including binary attributes) are replaced with
continuous using the methods specified by the user.

.. image:: images/Continuize.png


The first box, :obj:`Multinominal attributes`, defines the treatment of
multivalued discrete attributes. Say that we have a discrete attribute status
with values low, middle and high, listed in that order. Options for its
transformation are

   - :obj:`Target or First value as base`: the attribute will be transformed
     into two continuous attributes, status=middle with values 0 or 1
     signifying whether the original attribute had value middle on a
     particular example, and similarly, status=high. Hence, a three-valued
     attribute is transformed into two continuous attributes, corresponding to
     all except the first value of the attribute.

   - :obj:`Most frequent value as base`: similar to the above, except that the
     data is analyzed and the most frequent value is used as a base. So, if
     most examples have the value middle, the two newly constructed continuous
     attributes will be status=low and status=high.

   - :obj:`One attribute per value`: this would construct three continuous
     attributes out of a three-valued discrete one.

   - :obj:`Ignore multinominal attributes`: removes the multinominal attributes
     from the data.

   - :obj:`Treat as ordinal:` converts the attribute into a continuous
     attribute with values 0, 1, and 2.

   - :obj:`Divide by number of values:` same as above, except that the values
     are normalized into range 0-1. So, our case would give values 0, 0.5 and
     1.


Next box defines the treatment of continuous attributes. You will usually
prefer :obj:`Leave as is` option. The alternative is :obj:`Normalize by span`
which will subtract the lowest value found in the data and divide by the span,
so all values will fit into [0, 1]. Finally, :obj:`Normalize by variance`
subtracts the average and divides by the variance.

Finally, you can decide what happens with the class if it is discrete. Besides
leaving it as it is, there are also the options which are available for
multinominal attributes, except for those options which split the attribute
into more than one attribute - this obviously cannot be supported since you
cannot have more than one class attribute. Additionally, you can
:obj:`specify a target value`; this will transform the class into a continuous
attribute with value 1 if the value of the original attribute equals the target
and 0 otherwise.

With :obj:`value range`, you can define the values of the new attributes. In
the above text we supposed the range :obj:`from 0 to 1`. You can change it to
:obj:`from -1 to 1`.

If :obj:`Send automatically` is set, the data set is committed on any change.
Otherwise, you have to press :obj:`Send data` after each change.

Examples
--------

The schema below shows a typical use of this widget: in order to properly plot
linear projection of the data, discrete attributes need to be converted to
continuous, therefore we put the data through Continuize widget before drawing
it. Attribute "chest pain" originally had four values and was transformed into
three continuous attributes; similar happened to gender, which was transformed
into a single attribute gender=female.

.. image:: images/Continuize-Schema.png
